
# Real-Time Flight Delay Prediction

This repository contains the code and data for the project "Real-Time Flight Delay Prediction Using Machine Learning." The project aims to predict flight delays in real time using machine learning models based on data from JFK Airport.

## Project Overview

Flight delays are a significant challenge in the aviation industry, leading to operational inefficiencies and customer dissatisfaction. This project introduces a machine learning approach to predict flight delays using a combination of historical flight data and real-time weather data.



## Data Sources

The data for this project is sourced from the following APIs:

- **Aviation Edge API**: Provides detailed historical and real-time data on flights, including information on departures, arrivals, delays, and other flight-related parameters. [API Documentation](https://aviation-edge.com/premium-api/).
- **Open-Weather API**: Supplies real-time weather data, which is crucial for understanding how current weather conditions may impact flight delays. [API Documentation](https://openweathermap.org/api).
- **Openn-Weather*: 1 Year historical Data for JFK Area from 7/1/2023.  

### API Keys

To replicate this project, you will need API keys for both the Aviation Edge and Open-Weather APIs. You can obtain these keys by signing up on their respective websites. The API keys should be stored securely and not shared publicly.

## Setup Instructions

1. **Clone the repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/elmasri-ali/Real-Time-Flight-Delay-Prediction.git
   ```

2. **Create and activate the Conda environment:**:
   ```bash
   conda env create -f environment.yml
   conda activate your_environment_name
   ```

3. **Add your API keys**:
   - Create a `.env` file in the root directory of the project.
   - Add your API keys in the following format:
     ```
     AVIATION_EDGE_API_KEY=your_aviation_edge_api_key
     OPEN_WEATHER_API_KEY=your_open_weather_api_key
     ```

4. **Run the notebooks**:
   - Open the notebooks in the `notebooks/` directory to explore the data, train the models, and perform real-time predictions.

5. **Generated Data**:
   - All data generated by the scripts will be saved in the `data/` folder.

## Project Results

The final model combines XGBoost and Random Forest to predict flight delays with high accuracy. The ensemble model was evaluated using metrics such as Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and the results demonstrate the model's robustness and reliability.

## Future Work

- Extend the model to other airports.
- Incorporate additional data sources to improve prediction accuracy.
- Implement a more sophisticated real-time data pipeline.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- The data sources used in this project.
- The contributors to the Python libraries that made this possible.
